Bangladesh unrest: Muhammad Yunus, the 'Banker to the Poor,' poised to tame the chaos

This reminds everyone of Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus who established the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh in 1983. The pioneer of the global microcredit movement is back again, this time with the heavy task of rebuilding Bangladesh as the nation continues to boil.

Yunus will be the chief adviser to the interim government, confirmed his spokesperson saying, " Yunus has agreed to request of students to be adviser for interim government."

The spokesperson told Reuters, "Yunus will return to Bangladesh 'immediately' after a minor medical procedure in Paris."

Nahid Islam, one of the key coordinators of the movement, said that Prof Yunus has agreed to take on this crucial responsibility at the call of the student community to save the country, the Daily Star newspaper reported.


In 2011, the government led by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina removed Yunus from his position as head of Grameen Bank. The official reason given was that Yunus had exceeded the legal retirement age of 60, being 73 at the time.

The decision to remove Yunus sparked significant public outrage. Thousands of Bangladeshis responded by forming a human chain to protest his removal.

Yunus was also marred in the controversy when he was indicted by a Bangladesh court on charges of embezzlement of 252.2 million taka ($2 million) from the workers' welfare fund of Grameen Telecom, which owns a 34.2% stake in Grameenphone, the country's largest mobile phone company and a subsidiary of Norway's telecom giant Telenor. Yunus and others were also accused of money laundering.

Who is Muhammad Yunus?
The Nobel Peace Prize 2006 was awarded jointly to Muhammad Yunus and Grameen Bank "for their efforts to create economic and social development from below."

Yunus believed that credit is a fundamental human right. His objective was to help poor people escape from poverty by providing loans on terms suitable to them and by teaching them a few sound financial principles so they could help themselves.

From Yunus' personal loan of small amounts of money to destitute basketweavers in Bangladesh in the mid-70s, the Grameen Bank advanced to the forefront of a burgeoning world movement toward eradicating poverty through microlending.

Replicas of the Grameen Bank model can be found in more than 100 countries worldwide, according to the Nobel Prize website.

Muhammad Yunus, born in 1940 in Chittagong, Bangladesh, studied at Dhaka University and later received a Fulbright scholarship to study economics at Vanderbilt University. He earned his Ph.D. in economics in 1969 from Vanderbilt and then became an assistant professor at Middle Tennessee State University before returning to Bangladesh to lead the economics department at Chittagong University.

Muhammad Yunus: Arch-foe of Sheikh Hasina
Muhammad Yunus, a prominent opponent of Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, expressed strong criticism toward her leadership.

Yunus briefly ventured into politics in 2007, attempting to form his own party. This move is believed to have drawn the ire of Hasina, who accused him of "sucking blood from the poor."

"Monday marked the 'second liberation day' for Bangladesh after its 1971 war of independence from Pakistan following the exit of Hasina," Yunus told Times Now.

Muhammad Yunus: The Scholar
Yunus began his higher education journey at Dhaka University in Bangladesh. He then moved to the United States on a Fulbright scholarship to study economics at Vanderbilt University, where he earned his Ph.D. in 1969. The following year, he joined Middle Tennessee State University as an assistant professor of economics.

Yunus began his higher education journey at Dhaka University in Bangladesh. He then moved to the United States on a Fulbright scholarship to study economics at Vanderbilt University, where he earned his Ph.D. in 1969. The following year, he joined Middle Tennessee State University as an assistant professor of economics.

According to the Nobel Prize website, after his stint in the United States, Yunus returned to Bangladesh and took the role of head of the economics department at Chittagong University. He significantly contributed to multiple international bodies, including his role from 1993 to 1995 as a member of the International Advisory Group for the Fourth World Conference on Women, appointed by the UN secretary general.

Yunus has also been involved with the Global Commission of Women’s Health, the Advisory Council for Sustainable Economic Development, and the UN Expert Group on Women and Finance. His efforts have earned him numerous international awards.

The accolades of Muhammad Yunus
As per the Nobel Prize website, Yunus' awards include the Mohamed Shabdeen Award for Science (1993) in Sri Lanka and the Humanitarian Award (1993) from CARE, USA. He also received the World Food Prize in 1994 from the World Food Prize Foundation, USA, and Bangladesh's highest award, the Independence Day Award, in 1987.

Other notable awards include the King Hussein Humanitarian Leadership Award (2000) from the King Hussein Foundation in Jordan, the Volvo Environment Prize (2003) from the Volvo Environment Prize Foundation in Sweden, and the Nikkei Asia Prize for Regional Growth (2004) from Nihon Keizai Shimbun in Japan.

Further accolades include the Franklin D. Roosevelt Freedom Award in 2006 from the Roosevelt Institute of The Netherlands and the Seoul Peace Prize in 2006 from the Seoul Peace Prize Cultural Foundation in Seoul, Korea.

